Memory Management & JVM Internals
The Java Virtual Machine (JVM) manages memory using a structured approach to optimize performance and garbage collection.

1. JVM Architecture
The JVM consists of the following main components:

1.1 ClassLoader
Loads Java class files into memory when needed.
Uses three types of class loaders:
Bootstrap ClassLoader – Loads core Java classes (java.lang, java.util).
Extension ClassLoader – Loads classes from ext directory.
Application ClassLoader – Loads application-specific classes.

1.2 Runtime Data Areas (JVM Memory Model)
JVM memory is divided into different sections to efficiently store and manage objects, method calls, and execution flow.
JVM Memory Areas
Heap: Stores objects and class instances. Garbage collection (GC) happens here.
Stack: Stores method calls and local variables. Each thread has its own stack.
Method Area (Metaspace in Java 8+): Stores class metadata, method code, and static variables.
PC Register: Keeps track of the current instruction for each thread.
Native Method Stack: Manages native method calls.

Heap Memory (Shared)
Stores objects and class instances.
Garbage Collection (GC) reclaims unused memory.
Divided into:
	Young Generation (Eden + Survivor Spaces S1, S2): New objects are allocated here.

	Old Generation (Tenured Space): Long-lived objects are promoted here.

	Metaspace: Stores class metadata (introduced in Java 8, replacing PermGen).
	Stack Memory (Per Thread)
	Stores method call frames, local variables, and references.
	Each thread has its own stack.
	PC (Program Counter) Register
	Stores the address of the currently executing instruction in each thread.
	Native Method Stack
	Stores method calls for native (non-Java) methods.

1.3 Execution Engine
	The Execution Engine is responsible for running the bytecode. It consists of:
	Interpreter – Converts bytecode into machine code line by line.
	Just-In-Time (JIT) Compiler – Optimizes performance by compiling bytecode into native code at runtime.
	Garbage Collector (GC) – Automatically removes unused objects from heap memory.

2. JVM Memory Management & Garbage Collection
	The JVM automatically manages memory allocation and deallocation using Garbage Collection (GC).

2.1 Garbage Collection (GC) Phases
	Mark Phase – Identifies live objects.
	Sweep Phase – Removes unused objects.
	Compact Phase – Rearranges memory to avoid fragmentation.

2.2 Types of Garbage Collectors
	Serial GC (Single-threaded, used for small apps).
	Parallel GC (Multi-threaded, used for high throughput apps).
	CMS (Concurrent Mark Sweep) GC (Low-latency, deprecated in Java 9).
	G1 GC (Garbage First GC) (Default in Java 9+, divides heap into regions for efficient collection).
	ZGC (Low-latency GC) (Introduced in Java 11, minimizes pause times).

GC automatically reclaims unused memory, preventing leaks.
Mark-Sweep-Compact is the standard GC process.
Different GC strategies exist (Serial, Parallel, CMS, G1, ZGC).
G1 GC (Default in Java 9+) balances performance and low pause times.
ZGC (Java 11+) is best for real-time applications with ultra-low pause times.



2. Just-In-Time (JIT) Compiler
The JIT compiler optimizes code execution by compiling bytecode into native machine code at runtime.
It improves performance by caching compiled code and performing optimizations like inlining and loop unrolling.

3. Garbage Collection (GC)
GC automatically reclaims memory by removing unused objects. Common algorithms:

Mark and Sweep: Identifies live objects (mark phase) and removes unused ones (sweep phase).
Stop-the-World Pause: Temporarily stops application threads for GC.
Compact: Moves live objects to remove fragmentation.

4. G1 Garbage Collector (Java 8+)
G1 (Garbage First) GC divides the heap into regions and prioritizes areas with most garbage.
It reduces pause times and improves performance compared to older collectors like CMS.

java -XX:+UseG1GC -jar myapp.jar

Changes in Java 8
Metaspace (Replaces PermGen)
Metaspace replaces PermGen for storing class metadata, avoiding memory leaks.

Changes in Java 17 (LTS)
ZGC & Improved G1GC
ZGC (Low-latency GC) minimizes pause times.
G1GC improvements for better performance.


The JIT compiler is a powerful JVM component that translates bytecode into optimized native code.
It adapts dynamically to the application’s behavior, improving speed without requiring developer intervention.
You can monitor and fine-tune JIT optimizations for better performance tuning in high-load applications.


Garbage Collection (GC) Strategies in JVM

1. Why Garbage Collection?
In Java, memory allocation is automatic, but memory deallocation (freeing up memory from unused objects) is handled by Garbage Collection (GC).
The GC process removes unused objects from the heap, preventing memory leaks and improving performance.

2. Phases of Garbage Collection
Garbage Collection typically works in three main phases:

	Mark Phase
	Identifies live objects (objects still in use).
	Uses reachability analysis to check objects that can still be accessed.

	Sweep Phase
	Removes unreachable objects (objects with no active references).

	Compact Phase (Optional)
	Rearranges memory to eliminate fragmentation, optimizing future allocations.

3. Garbage Collectors in Java
	Java provides different GC implementations for various use cases.

3.1 Serial GC 🏗
	Use case: Small applications, single-threaded environments.
	Uses a single-threaded approach.
	Performs "Stop-the-World" (STW) pauses to clean memory.
	Command-line option:
	java -XX:+UseSerialGC -jar myapp.jar

3.2 Parallel GC (Throughput GC) ⚡
	Use case: High-performance applications needing high throughput.
	Uses multiple threads for garbage collection.
	STW pauses but better than Serial GC.
	Command-line option:
	java -XX:+UseParallelGC -jar myapp.jar


3.3 CMS (Concurrent Mark Sweep) GC ⏳ (Deprecated in Java 9)
	Use case: Low-latency applications.
	Runs GC concurrently with application threads to minimize pause times.
	Uses background threads for GC.
	Higher CPU usage than Parallel GC.
	java -XX:+UseConcMarkSweepGC -jar myapp.jar

3.4 G1 GC (Garbage First GC) - Default in Java 9+ 🚀
	Use case: Large heap applications, minimizing pause times.
	Divides heap into multiple regions instead of fixed Young/Old generations.
	Prioritizes garbage collection in regions with most garbage.
	Balances throughput and low-latency.

Command-line option:
	java -XX:+UseG1GC -jar myapp.jar

3.5 ZGC (Low-Latency GC) - Java 11+ ⚡⚡
	Use case: Real-time applications needing ultra-low pause times (<1ms).
	Works on multi-terabyte heaps (e.g., 2TB).
	Almost no STW pauses.

Command-line option:
	java -XX:+UseZGC -jar myapp.jar

4. Example: Understanding GC with Logs
You can enable GC logs to observe memory cleanup.

	java -XX:+PrintGCDetails -jar myapp.jar
	Sample output:
	[GC (Allocation Failure) [PSYoungGen: 2048K->512K(8192K)] 4096K->3072K(16384K)]
	[GC (CMS Initial Mark) [1.424s] [Mark phase completed in 0.01s]]
	[Full GC (CMS Final Remark) 3072K->1024K(16384K), 0.02 secs]

	PSYoungGen: Young Generation GC.
	CMS Initial Mark: CMS GC starting phase.
	Full GC: Full garbage collection.

5. Choosing the Right GC
	GC Type	Best for	Pause Times	Throughput	Memory Usage
	Serial GC	Small apps	High (STW)	Low	Low
	Parallel GC	High throughput apps	Medium	High	Medium
	CMS GC	Low-latency apps	Low	Medium	High
	G1 GC	Large-scale apps	Low	High	Medium
	ZGC	Real-time apps	Very Low (<1ms)	Medium	High


6. Manual Garbage Collection (Not Recommended)
Java allows manually requesting GC with:
System.gc();  // Suggests GC, but JVM may ignore it

Why not recommended?
JVM optimizes memory better than manual intervention.
Calling System.gc(); can cause unnecessary CPU overhead.
Verbose-gc
Shenandaoh GC(java 12)


